From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists. Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 32 recorded live
Thursday, September 9th, 2010. Support for Hanselman
is provided by teller R
a D controls the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Colin Miller
about the.net micro framework. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman, and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes. Today. I've got
Colin Miller, that product unit
manager for the dotnet micro
framework, tiny, tiny, tiny framework.
Thank you Colin for taking
a second to chat with
me today. Thank you. I'm
I'm looking at my spot
watch. I've got a spot
watch spot was a smart,
personal object technology. And I
remember that this thing came
out. It came out in
2004 and I loved this
thing. It was tiny and
they always told me that
I could write.net code on
this. I can write C
sharp and we talked and
I never got around to
writing C sharp code, but
did this watch really run.net?
It did actually. Unfortunately you
probably would have been disappointed
to try and write C-sharp
code. Cause one thing we
didn't do at the time
was actually expose the ability
to, to download your own
applications on it. So it
did support downloading assemblies, all
of which were written in,
in C sharp. One of
the things in looking at
creating that watch was we
were looking, as you can
tell from the name, we
were looking at a very
broad idea of smart, personal
objects, all sorts of things,
becoming smarter in your environment.
And we were looking for
a platform that we thought
we would want it, frankly,
we want to be working
in, in these small devices
and not finding one. We
ended up creating one and
by, by taking the idea
and the, and the CLR
model, and reimplementing it for
these specifically for these very
small devices and then actually
extending it quite a bit
for things that are specific
requirements of embedded devices. So
exposing the underlying hardware interfaces,
GPIO things like that and
our management things that frankly,
aren't very interesting on a,
on a, on a, on,
on a desktop.net application. W
was that an unusual idea?
I mean, were you there
in those first meetings where
they were like, yeah, let's
do it and see, and
you're like, no, no, let's
do it. And you just
use.net. Yeah. We actually tried
to do it and see
to start with, and we
looked at some, some platforms
that were available in research
and commercially and I had
some failures right off the
bat and the embedded. Development's
always been a very specialized
set of skills and which
frankly, we didn't have a
lot of inside Microsoft. We
did have a lot of.net
developers. And so we could
see that if we were
going to develop applications, it
was going to be much
easier to get the skills
to do that. If we
had a platform that that
would allow us to use
the, the bulk of the
development skills that both Microsoft
has, but also frankly, the,
the, the general industry has.
And the idea certainly was
that we would, we would
have a platform that would
be open to a lot
of variations in applications. So
finding something where we had
a much higher productivity than
the current model of embedded
application development was, was key
to the whole, to the
whole idea. And this happened
sort of concurrently with some
things happening at hardware that
made all this possible, that
you know, up until not
too many years ago, about
that same time, almost all
applications were written on little
eight bit processors. And, and
then suddenly the 32 bit
processors came down in power
consumption and price. So it
was economically feasible to make
these devices in, in, on
a, in a, in a
language that is the same
set of tools that are
the same ones you use
on a desktop and, and
to change and change the
way embedded development is done.
So it's not done again
by specialized skills and using
specialized tools, but by using
the same tools that you
have using for your other
applications. One of the things
that I think makes it
really interesting is that we're
seeing more and more connected
devices coming out. There's, there's
actually estimations that there are
more as many devices at
this point talking to each
other over the internet, as
there are people, and the
expectation that that's going to
be many times as many
devices as people in the
near future. So these devices
are now becoming part of
the ecosystem. Like we sort
of saw potentially happening back
in 2004. And as they
happen as that, as they
start to become parts of
larger solutions, rather than isolated
embedded devices, it becomes more
and more interesting for the
developers to be able to
for.net to the developers, to
be able to, to work
in these, on these small
devices as well at the
PDC, not too long ago,
professional developers conference, I had
one guy extremely excited about
the micro framework because his
company had just turned down
a job, which included, required
that they work on a
device. And now he realized
that they didn't have to
do that anymore. That doesn't
mean that this is the
platform for all embedded development,
but for a large number
of embedded applications, the kind
of the kind of productivity
that you get from development
makes it, makes it feasible
to generate applications really quickly
that may not have the
same, you know, real time
or very specialized requirements as
others that others do. When
I think when I think
32 bit processor, I think
about three to six is
and 43 sixes. And now
you're saying that they're connected
and I've seen a lot
of these boards have USB
and have different plugs that
I'm used to seeing are
these tiny three sixes and
46, is that we're able
to buy for a couple
of dollars now, or is
it something else? Well, these,
these are mostly like arm
processors that sh two processors
from an assist cortex processors,
not too many, three 86
is, and four 86 is
these are, these are mostly
like the arm seven sized
processors. They're yeah. They're almost
all risk processors. The, and
they're up in the, you
know, the watches were done
in a 27 megahertz processor.
The, the current ones are
in the 70 megahertz range
frequently, Really, but they are
equivalent in power. I mean,
thinking about the machines that
I used when I was
in school, I'm hearing you
say that, you know, as
far as like horsepower, they're
there, they're there. Yeah. We
estimated that the, that the,
that the processor in that
watch was about to say
same as a, that was
an old PCAT that we
worked on when we were
younger and took up most
of my desk. That's amazing.
Now, when you're compiling, when
you're trying to make the
done at framework and that
then the CLR work, how
confident were you that it
was gonna fit? I mean,
I think of the framework
scaling up. I remember switching
from 32 bit processors to
64 bit. I remember applications
using two, three and four
gigabytes of Ram, you know,
scaling out, scaling up, how
hard is it to scale
down and what kinds of
things you have to throw
away. It actually requires that
you start from scratch. There
there's really no effective way
that we've never found anything
that we could take an
implementation that didn't start thinking
how small it could be
and effectively scale it down.
So what we do is
we, we, and it's one
of the reasons why we're
sort of an odd, odd
ball and the.net family, the
other.net versions, the compact framework
and the full framework are,
are in sync and compatible.
So if, if when you
look at version 4.0 of,
of compact framework, it will
be the same as 4.0
the full framework. Our 4.0
is sort of a, an
odd mix because we go
up and look at what's
going on. And then main,
main framework. We sort of
cherry pick what's appropriate for
these, for these smaller devices.
There's a lot of things
that frankly are not as
useful, not likely to be
useful on these small devices.
And then we reimplement what
what's important down there. So
we spent, you know, because
these, because these are connected
devices, we spent a lot
of time picking things out
of WCF. And so we
have support for web services
for devices or DPW S
because these devices frequently have
user interfaces. We take, we
took a lot of the
WPF model and, and put
that down here. But again,
all these things are, are
uniquely uniquely implemented for these
devices. The development environment is
visual studio, and I was
actually surprised slash impressed when
I, I just installed on
a framework micro framework, rather
4.1, I said, file new
project inside of the same
IDE that I was using
for websites that I was
using for windows phone. It's
just, it's all inside there.
So that was cool. And
then F five debugging, all
that stuff worked exactly as
before now, I noticed that
I did have to install
something special for each board
that I had. I have
a GHS electronics board. I
have a Tahoe, two board
and a net Duino so
three different boards from three
different manufacturers. They all use
the micro framework, but for
each of them, I had
to install something else. Can
you talk about the relationship
between the micro framework and
that thing that I have
to install for each board?
Yeah, there's, there's, there's essentially
two layers of, of work
that are, that our partners
do. The, the application that
you create is hopefully going
to be very hardware independent
because you're working in a
virtual machine, which is our,
our CLR and underneath that
too, because the processors and
the hardware that these each
of these partners is using
is fundamentally different in some
way or another. It's, there's
a requirement that they actually
work at the, at the
driver level that's done in
C plus plus with the
tools that are provided by
the processor manufacturer that they
select. So they do some
of the heavy lifting to
glue the, the micro framework
into their specific hardware. And
then at the, at the
upper level, another thing that
you're going to find is
that they, that they extend
the micro framework. So they'll
have libraries that run on
the micro framework on the
CLR that provide things like
additional drivers for canvas, for
wifi, for a variety of
other sorts of functionality that,
that aren't, aren't supported natively
in the micro framework. One
of the things that this
model does is that it
actually enables because we give
you access inside the micro
framework to the underlying hardware,
you can actually write your
drivers in, in, in manage
code and have it run
on top as well as,
as writing at the bottom
layer. Yeah. That's, that's interesting
that you point that out
because I think it was
the Tahoe too, that I
was looking at that had
an accelerometer and the, the
code that I was for
that actually referred to the
name of the chip that
was like namespace dot, you
know, whatever the name of
that particular chip was. And
it was written entirely in
C sharp. So I was
wondering, is it really a
driver, or is it just
a layer of abstraction, or
I guess, is that the
same thing, But by functional
definition, it becomes a driver.
You could, you could do
that same thing in, in
C at the bottom layer,
but, but it's it. And
whether or not you do
need to do that as
opposed to using C sharp,
largely depends on what your
performance requirements are. Obviously, obviously
there's a significant difference between
running interpreted code and running
native code. Is this code
jetted? I mean, is it
interpreted the whole time, or
did you do what kind
of performance can you expect
to see with C-sharp on
this, on these devices? It's
all interpreted one of the
things. So to give you
an idea of what the,
what our footprint target is,
we actually will run on
a, on a machine with
about 64 K at Ram,
which was one of our
targets and two 56 K
of flash. And when we
were doing that, as you
get down to those sizes,
jet doesn't really work very
well because there's a couple
of things. One is that
native code is about 10
times larger than, than I
L a. So right off
the bat, as soon as
you get something, it becomes
larger. And the other thing
is that when you, when
you're close to the edges
of memory of your memory
availability, what we'd find is
you would start thrashing, you
would get something, it would
call into something else, you'd
throw away what you just
did it so that you
could get the other thing.
And then when that returns,
you have to read yet
what you just threw away.
And so there was a,
there was a very steep
performance cliff. When, when we,
when we looked at
in terms of performance, it,
it really depends on the
application. It's, it works fine
for UI. It works. I've
used it in a number
of applications that, that that's
where it's going to be
very responsive. One of the
things in terms of, you
know, when people talk about
real time, one of the
things that they insist on
is, is having deterministic response.
So that if I, if
I hit a button, I
know every time I'm going
to get some, some specific
latency, we don't have that
right now because we have
a garbage collection cycle that
may hit, hit some on
determined time. So that's one
thing that if we were
going to try and address
more, more real time applications,
we would have to address.
And we, we have, we've
discussed some, some strategies for
that, but it hasn't quite
made it up to the
top of our priority queue.
Yet. This is the part
of the show where I
mock you while actually Tellerik
mock says your applications, that
you're testing dependent on external
systems over which you have
no control, maybe you're being
slowed down by those systems
or lack of availability, responsiveness.
Do you want to do
TDD, right? Our friends at
Tellerik help you solve some
of those problems with their
newest mocking tool, just mock
it'll let you do fast,
simple controlled unit tests, independent
of external resources, like databases,
web services, proprietary code, unlike
some mocking tools, just mock
works with non-virtual methods, seal
classes, static methods, giving you
complete control of your code.
You can get more details.
You can download just mock
at telerik.com/just mock. And don't
forget to thank Tellerik for
supporting Hanselman it's on their
Facebook fan page, facebook.com/tellerik. Thanks
a lot. I, I took
the net Duino, which was
a device that I wanted
to play with it immediately,
and I didn't have any
hardware yet just to speak
of. So I was, the
only thing I could really
do was blink the led
on the, on the net
Duino cause it's the smallest
of the devices that I
have. But I wrote in,
I dunno, 60 lines of
code, a little Morris code
application. So it would take,
take ASCII and it would
spit it out as a,
as Morse code. And other
than one line, or I
talked to out an output
port object, and I referred
to the onboard led as
a, a constant, everything else
looks exactly like you couldn't
look at it and tell
it wasn't a console app.
So I thought that was
pretty, pretty impressive, but because
I was on such a
tiny device, I will say
that I was a little
paralyzed from a, from an,
from a programmer's perspective because
I was, I was paranoid
that I was going write
something that wasn't performing. And
I went back and forth.
I use a hash table.
Should I have a bunch
of constants? Should I use
parallel arrays? How, how worried
should I be about that
kind of thing? And was
it, was that, is that
a natural feeling to be
so concerned that now I'm
in a tiny, tiny world,
I should write my code
differently. Not sure the range
of trying to do like,
like voice processing for the
kinds of applications that P
certainly I needed that hobbyist
applications. I don't think you
would run into many, many
times when you have to
worry about performance at all.
There are some tricks, I
think to, you know, and
there, there are, there are
tricks to, if you were
writing a commercial application that
had to run on batteries,
those are then you want
to, then you want to
make sure that for instance,
that you, that you run
everything on events so that,
so that the processor can
cause the processor will, if
it's red manager, when it
can't find a thread to
run will automatically go into
a lower power state, as
long as that's supported in
that, by that processor. So
you have some programming tricks
like that for, for, for
commercial applications where you might
have power constraints, but for,
for most, any of the
hobbyists sorts of applications, I
have never, never run into
performance problems. That's interesting. And
then, yeah, The whole thing
is open source. So, you
know, if you ever do
have Any, Any real performance
problems and you want to
solve them by going into
native code, we, we both
have the source out there
and we support interrupt. So
one of the nice things
I think about the model
as it's currently set up
is that you can get
into one of these devices
at a very high level.
If you are real are
really want to get, you
know, roll your sleeves up
and get, get into it.
So you can, you can
take it as far as
you want, in terms of
diving into, you know, doing,
like I said, native code,
or even going into the
bowels of the micro framework
or the porting layer and
redoing what you want. So
it's all open source. It's
all, what is it? Apache
license all the way down,
right? Wow. Was that hard
to get Microsoft to do
that And parts, but I
think that there's, there's certainly
an appreciation for, for that,
that model. That's, that's growing
in the company. There's a
lot more support for that.
Then I think there wasn't
a path and there's a
lot more things you're seeing,
you know, like iron Ruby
and iron Python and things
like that that are, that
are joining that trend. We
actually took a couple of
years where we tried to
make a commercial business out
of this and, and charge
a per unit royalty for
the micro framework. But they're
real, that reality struck us
that there just really isn't
enough money And go, when
you're talking about it, you
know, a two bit pro
$2 processor and a, you
know, a $10 device in
terms of its bill of
materials. It's really hard to
squeeze a couple of dollars
or anything meaningful out of
that. So, so, so it's,
it's this, this is a
much better approach for, for
this, for this size device
thing. What does Microsoft get
out of it? I mean,
don't you worry that if
it's not a big business
near the whole group will
go away someday? Well, it's
not a big business from
a Microsoft standpoint. I think
it's an important business for
Microsoft, because like I said,
these, these devices are now
connected. Microsoft is absolutely unique
in this, in this arena
because we know we have
a single programming model and
tool chain. That'll take you
from that little, the net
wino board up to your
PC, up to web of
webpages, up to servers and
up eventually to the cloud.
So the same programming skills
translate through all of that.
I think that's an important
story from Microsoft. And, and,
and I'll be quite honest,
if, if, if other, if
other platforms are used at
the bottom end, nobody wants
to have a mixed development
shop if they don't have
to. So, so I think
it's, it's, it's useful for
Microsoft from Microsoft standpoint, for
us to be able to
say that we have this,
this single programming model that
has the broadest range of
any, How many, how many
people do you have actively
writing code on this inside
Microsoft? How many, like Microsoft
work on this thing, that's
amazing that you pull that
off. I'm sure that many,
many people worked on it
over the years, but the
fact that there's four now
is pretty amazing. And how
does the open source stuff
changed the way that the
inner that the partners interact?
Like, like I assume that
Duino one day they called
you. Like, when I assume
it just came out of
blue, right. One day the
phone rang, Hey, I want
to do this. Or can
you do all of it
by himself without ever giving
you a call? He actually
showed up one day and
said, look, what I got
working. Oh yeah, he could
do. You can do, you
can do this all by
yourself. We try and help
people as much as possible.
Yeah. But, you know, obviously
with four people, we, we
do rely on the community
to be self sustaining and
to some extent, and we
have some participants in the
community who have been just
great at, at pitching in
and helping each other out.
So, and we've actually, so
we went to open source
with 4.0 the last November.
We did our 4.1 release
just six months later to
get visual studio support and
a couple other things in
there. And we already, within
that timeframe had our first
contributions from the community that
were included in that release.
And we're hoping that continues
to grow, frankly. That's cool.
And so, so there's committed
code from people who aren't
you inside of 4.1. Absolutely.
That's cool. So, so I,
I brought up the net
Dorina one, cause it's, it's
the smallest one I have.
Are there smaller boards or
is that pretty much the
smallest as far as like
the limited amount of functionality?
I think that's a that's
there are, there are two
companies that are making boards
in that size GHR electronics.
And as, as a board
on their tiny CLR site
and the net Duino board,
they are both, they're both
Arduino compatible boards are very
popular hobbyist in education board.
And so there's a lot
of peripherals for that. I
just blogged recently about putting
a, a, an Arduino shield
and the hardware is frequently
called shields for the, for
the Arduino, a joystick shield
on top of a net
wino and running a robotic
arm with that. And so,
so they take advantage. Both
those companies take advantage of
the fact that there is
an existing ecosystem of, of
hardware packages for, for the,
for the Ardwino. You know,
I, yesterday this is true
story yesterday. I was cleaning
up my office and I
I've seen your office by
the way. And I know
that if either you or
I clean our offices out,
it's going to be an
event. And it's going to
uncover some amazing pieces of
artifacts and pieces out of
the past. So I'm digging
through my office and I
found a Newton message pad.
And I found, you know,
computers that were 20 plus
years old. And I found
this thing called a space
orb three 60. This is
a three-dimensional controller. It's basically
a rubber ball posted on
stick. And instead of using
your thumbs and two, two
joysticks, you just push this
ball up, down left, right.
And it was, it is
to this day, still used
as a 360 degree, three
D modeling tool. But in
the early nineties was used
on games like descent and
doom to do 360 degree
stuff. But it only works
on a nine pin RS,
two 30, two serial. And
the company's basically given up
on the gaming world and
to the hardcore gamer. This
is, this is the thing,
right? Over the years, I've
been looking around and trying
to figure out if I'm
ever going to bring this
thing back to life. And
last night I started poking
around and I find a
guy who made an orbit
shield. And you just said,
shield is a board. It's
a, daughterboard effectively for one
of these compatible devices. And
because the it's a standardized
platform and there's some work
that's been done to make
it show up inside of
windows. This guy has basically,
you pay 30 or 40
bucks. You buy this Arduino
shield. And he has that
bridge that makes this, this
20 year old joystick look
like a joystick and windows
seven. So I'm really looking
forward to playing with that
and seeing what I can
do, maybe moving things around
and writing a net, Duino
port a.net port. And they're
not in a micro framework
to see if I can
take input from this, from
this thing. And that, that
just in the three days
that I've been playing with,
this is already kind of,
what's opened up for me,
which is amazing. Well, yeah,
so there's, I think one
of the interesting things is
that I think everybody went
through engineering school at either
either computer science or electrical
engineering had some remembered some
of the great fun they
had and making things work
and, and everybody has a
story and they, and it
almost, and that was one
of the things I think
that sort of excites people
about this as being able
to get back to just
being able to, to make
things happen. A lot of
times we get into our
jobs and they, and they're,
and they're a little bit
more abstract than, than making
an led blink. So, Yeah,
it's funny when I got
the led to blink and
literally, I think I put
an hour into this, I
just, it's so silly. There's
just this little internal child
that was just like, woo.
Even though it was such
a basic thing. So then
I started poking around with
the larger boards. W talk
to me about how these
boards scale up physically. Cause
like we said, we've got
the Arduino and the, the
tiny clr.com from JHI and
then on the, on the,
on the higher end they've
got touchscreens and they've got
accelerometers and buttons. Yeah. So
there's, there's a full range
of boards, right, right. Up
to some, obviously some very
expensive, very serious commercial boards,
essentially. All of our ports
that were, have been made
have been done by the
Silicon providers. So usually they
have for each of their
processors, they have either they
or some partners provide development
boards. And then folks like
OD in Europe device solutions.net
solutions in, in, in England
are all providing additional boards
that have they go right
up to, like you say,
touch screens and a full,
full exposure of some very
powerful processors. By that time
you're looking at usually an
arm nine and the hundreds
of megahertz processing power. Another
project I did recently on
the blog was to actually
create a, a bicycle computer.
And it's the, the idea
behind it was that I'm
always saying that now anybody
with dotnet skills can create
an embedded application. So I
thought, well, maybe I should
do it to show sort
of a demonstration. So defined
what I thought would be
a reasonable commercial application, a
few bells and whistles. It's
got a gesture interface, partly
because I didn't want to
be fumbling for buttons at
40 miles an hour downhill.
And, and there's going to
be a, an article on
it's coming out in an
MSDN magazine. And I think
next month, talking about how
you can now take that
and connect that up to
the cloud. So now when
you just, when you get
your bicycle into the, into
the garage, you just tap
the screen and an off
goes the data to some
service that lets you, you
know, either compete or with
your friends or collect your
data. But that was written
on a sort of intermediate
board from Phi. So there's,
there's a board for almost
any, any application. Yeah. This
was a nine part series
that you did bicycle and
the bicycle computers on the
dinette micro framework blog. And
I'll post all the links
in the show notes to
make sure. And this was
a really great tutorial because
you went through it really
step by step. Was this
about the way that you
thought about it? I mean,
you started with, you know,
picking the board and then
deciding on the sensors and
integrating the touch and then
adding more complicated sensors is
the way you wrote it,
the way that you built
it. It was absolutely stream
of consciousness. In fact, I
had thought I would do
three articles and, and got,
just took it where it
would lead me. I actually
have three more articles in
draft form that I haven't
had time to finish that
I hope to get back
to at some point cause
the, the project keeps evolving
And this is something that
all the full source code
is available. And we'll put
up on code Plex, you
use a GA chai Cobra
board. Did you have to
custom build anything? Or was
this all stuff people could,
you know, brackets and things
that we could find at,
at home Depot, This, the
stuff that most of the
things that I bought, I
got out of places like
spark fund. And I identified
the, the, the particular boards
that I used. They were
things like accelerometers and, and
pressure sensors. There was some
back and forth, but I
was trying to use a
sensor to tell what my
altitude was. And I ended
up using an inclinometer instead.
And I went through, you
know, why I ended up
with that. It was certainly
easier to deal with in
the pressure sensor, which seemed
to be a little odd,
but yeah, all that stuff
is available. There is some,
you know, some soldering involved
I have, well, to that
point, I'll give you a
sort of a sneak preview.
We're gonna announce something at
a maker fair and New York
later this month, that is
a little bit of a
breakthrough on making this, this
kind of project available to
people who don't have electronic
skills. Yeah. For that. You're
not going to drop, you're
not going to drop the
scoop right here. Are you,
I better not get in
trouble for, for, so it's
actually, it's actually a project
coming out of MSR and
Cambridge, Microsoft research in Cambridge.
And, and so it's really
their scoop to drop, but,
but will later this month
we will be, we'll be
talking about some, I think
some really cool stuff. It's
like one to your point,
to the point of, of
your recent art blog, where,
you know, hardware for, at,
for software engineers, this makes
it possible for anybody without
any particular, anybody who can
program to do some really
fun stuff really quickly it's
it was technology that they,
Microsoft research did specifically so
that they could prototype devices
quickly. But it, it makes
it easy for anybody to
do things now. All right.
Well, we'll look for that
at maker fair. And I'd
love to see when you
finish your series on the
bicycle computer, I'd love to
see a YouTube video of
the whole thing in action.
Yeah. I'm going to do
that. I was thinking about
doing that hopefully before the
summer is completely gone. Yeah.
It's raining down here too.
We've to beginning of September
what we've already decided here
in the Northwest that November
has arrived. All right. Well,
thank you so much. Colin
Miller for talking to us
about the dotnet Michael framework.
And this has been another
episode of Hansel minutes. See
you again next week.